README.md, before:

# Laravel Mass Update

[![Latest Version on Packagist](https://img.shields.io/packagist/v/iksaku/laravel-mass-update.svg?style=flat-square)](https://packagist.org/packages/iksaku/laravel-mass-update)
[![GitHub Tests Action Status](https://img.shields.io/github/workflow/status/iksaku/laravel-mass-update/Run%20Tests?label=tests)](https://github.com/iksaku/laravel-mass-update/actions?query=workflow%3Arun-tests+branch%3Amain)
[![GitHub Code Style Action Status](https://img.shields.io/github/workflow/status/iksaku/laravel-mass-update/Check%20&%20fix%20styling?label=code%20style)](https://github.com/iksaku/laravel-mass-update/actions?query=workflow%3A"Check+%26+fix+styling"+branch%3Amain)
[![Total Downloads](https://img.shields.io/packagist/dt/iksaku/laravel-mass-update.svg?style=flat-square)](https://packagist.org/packages/iksaku/laravel-mass-update)

Update multiple Laravel Model records, each with its own set of values, sending a single
query to your database!

## Installation

You can install the package via composer:

```bash
composer require iksaku/laravel-mass-update
```

## Usage

In your model class, add the `Iksaku\Laravel\MassUpdate\MassUpdatable` trait:

```php
use Illuminate\Database\Eloquent\Model;
use Iksaku\Laravel\MassUpdate\MassUpdatable;

class User extends Model
{
    use MassUpdatable;
    
    // ...
}
```

And that's all! Your model is now ready to update multiple records with varying values in a single query!

Let's take a look at some possible use cases for this new query:

### Simple use case: Update the values of multiple records

Image that you have the following `users` table:

| id | name           | username |
| -- | -------------- | -------- |
| 1  | Jorge Gonzales | iksaku   |
| 2  | Elena Gonzales | _TBD_    |

But, we want to update both records since those users have told us that their legal last name was misspelled
(missing accent in the letter `a` and last character should be a `z`, not an `s`).

Well, we can mass update those specific records:

```php
User::massUpdate(
    values: [
        ['id' => 1, 'name' => 'Jorge González'],
        ['id' => 2, 'name' => 'Elena González'],
    ]
);
```

Now, both records will be updated with their corresponding values in a single query, resulting in:

| id | name           | username |
| -- | -------------- | -------- |
| 1  | Jorge González | iksaku   |
| 2  | Elena González | _TBD_    |

By default, the `massUpdate` query will grab your model's primary key name and apply it as part of
the query to not affect other records.

If you want to use another column as an index to separate value types, you could pass it as a second
argument to the function call:

```php
User::massUpdate(
    values: [
        ['username' => 'iksaku', 'name' => 'Jorge González'],
        ['username' => 'TBD', 'name' => 'Elena González'],
    ],
    uniqueBy: 'username'
);
```

### Simple use case #2: Updating multiple Eloquent Models

If you need to update the values in some Model classes and want to automatically mass update those changes,
then this is for you!

The existing `masUpdate` query is capable of identifying the _dirty_ attributes of `Eloquent` model classes
and compile them properly. You don't need to manually cast them `toArray()`, instead, you just pass an array
with the models you want to update.

Let's recreate the previous example, but using `Eloquent` models...

```php
// Say we already pulled our user models previously... Something like this:
$jorge = User::where('name', 'Jorge Gonzales')->first();
$elena = User::where('name', 'Elena Gonzales')->first();

// And let's say we already made changes to those models... Like this:
$jorge->name = 'Jorge González';
$elena->name = 'Elena González';

// And now, let's update both models in a single query:
User::massUpdate(
    values: [$jorge, $elena]
);
```

Pretty cool, right?

> Tip: If you pass a full list of `Eloquent` models, only those with _dirty_ values will be updated,
> so you don't actually need to filter the unchanged ones manually.

> Note: It is only possible to mass update instances of the same `Eloquent` model,
> it is not possible to mix the _Query Builder_ with different `Eloquent` model classes.

### Complicated use case: Using multiple indexes to differentiate records

Let's say that we just created `expenses` table to track how much we spend across time, and
we manually filled the following values:

| id | year | quarter | total_expenses |
| -- | ---- | ------- | -------------- |
| .. | ..   | ..      | ..             |
| .. | 2019 | Q3      | 216.70         |
| .. | 2019 | Q4      | 216.70         |
| .. | 2020 | Q1      | `416.70`       |
| .. | 2020 | Q2      | 211.12         |
| .. | 2020 | Q3      | 113.17         |
| .. | 2020 | Q4      | 422.89         |
| .. | 2021 | Q1      | `431.35`       |

> Above information is not real, I don't track my expenses quarterly.

Oops... We made a little mistake... Expenses from Q1 of 2020 and 2021 are switched, and in order to fix it
we could only pass the `quarter` column as an index, but if we only pass down the `quarter` column as an index,
we'll modify **ALL** `Q1` records. So, for this, we should also pass down the `year` column as an index:

```php
Expense::massUpdate(
    values: [
        ['year' => 2020, 'quarter' => 'Q1', 'total_expenses' => 431.35],
        ['year' => 2021, 'quarter' => 'Q1', 'total_expenses' => 416.70],
    ],
    uniqueBy: ['year', 'quarter']
);
```

The result in the table will be properly updated:

| id | year | quarter | total_expenses |
| -- | ---- | ------- | -------------- |
| .. | ..   | ..      | ..             |
| .. | 2020 | Q1      | `431.35`       |
| .. | ..   | ..      | ..             |
| .. | 2021 | Q1      | `416.70`       |

> Tip: If, for any reason, you ever need to specify more than one or two indexes,
> just include all of them in the `values` and `uniqueBy` parameters.

> Note: It is important that you always include the `uniqueBy` columns in your
> `values` array, otherwise, undesired effects may happen.

> Note #2: It is not possible to update the values of the `uniqueBy` columns.
> Every column specified in this parameter will be filtered from the ones that
> are going to be updated.
>
> This prevents unexpected side effects from happening while updating `values`
> in `array` shape and passed as `Eloquent` models.

### Advanced use case: Chaining with other query statements

TODO

## Testing

```bash
composer test
```

## Changelog

Please see [CHANGELOG](CHANGELOG.md) for more information on what has changed recently.

## Contributing

Please see [CONTRIBUTING](.github/CONTRIBUTING.md) for details.

## Security Vulnerabilities

If you discover any security related issues, please email yo@jorgeglz.io instead of using the issue tracker.

## Credits

- [Jorge González](https://github.com/iksaku)
- [All Contributors](../../contributors)

## License

The MIT License (MIT). Please see [License File](LICENSE.md) for more information.

Commit message:

Improved docs, throw error when missing a 'uniqueBy' column

README.md, after:

# Laravel Mass Update

[![Latest Version on Packagist](https://img.shields.io/packagist/v/iksaku/laravel-mass-update.svg?style=flat-square)](https://packagist.org/packages/iksaku/laravel-mass-update)
[![GitHub Tests Action Status](https://img.shields.io/github/workflow/status/iksaku/laravel-mass-update/Run%20Tests?label=tests)](https://github.com/iksaku/laravel-mass-update/actions?query=workflow%3Arun-tests+branch%3Amain)
[![GitHub Code Style Action Status](https://img.shields.io/github/workflow/status/iksaku/laravel-mass-update/Check%20&%20fix%20styling?label=code%20style)](https://github.com/iksaku/laravel-mass-update/actions?query=workflow%3A"Check+%26+fix+styling"+branch%3Amain)
[![Total Downloads](https://img.shields.io/packagist/dt/iksaku/laravel-mass-update.svg?style=flat-square)](https://packagist.org/packages/iksaku/laravel-mass-update)

Update multiple Laravel Model records, each with its own set of values, sending a single
query to your database!

## Installation

You can install the package via composer:

```bash
composer require iksaku/laravel-mass-update
```

## Usage

In your model class, add the `Iksaku\Laravel\MassUpdate\MassUpdatable` trait:

```php
use Illuminate\Database\Eloquent\Model;
use Iksaku\Laravel\MassUpdate\MassUpdatable;

class User extends Model
{
    use MassUpdatable;
    
    // ...
}
```

And that's all! Your model is now ready to update multiple records with varying values in a single query!

Let's take a look at some possible use cases for this new query:

### Simple use case: Update the values of multiple records

Imagine that you have the following `users` table:

| id | name           | username |
| -- | -------------- | -------- |
| 1  | Jorge Gonzales | iksaku   |
| 2  | Gladys Martines| gm_mtz   |

But, we want to update both records since those users have told us that their legal last name was misspelled:
    * `González` is written with an accent on the letter `a`, and only uses `z`, never an `s`.
    * `Martínez` is written with an accent on the letter `i`, and last letter should be a `z`, not an `s`

Well, we can mass update those specific records:

```php
User::massUpdate(
    values: [
        ['id' => 1, 'name' => 'Jorge González'],
        ['id' => 2, 'name' => 'Gladys Martínez'],
    ]
);
```

Now, both records will be updated with their corresponding values in a single query, resulting in:

| id | name            | username |
| -- | --------------- | -------- |
| 1  | Jorge González  | iksaku   |
| 2  | Gladys Martínez | gm_mtz   |

By default, the `massUpdate` query will grab your model's primary key name and apply it as part of
the query to not affect other records.

If you want to use another column as an index to separate value types, you could pass it as a second
argument to the function call:

```php
User::massUpdate(
    values: [
        ['username' => 'iksaku', 'name' => 'Jorge González'],
        ['username' => 'gm_mtz', 'name' => 'Gladys Martínez'],
    ],
    uniqueBy: 'username'
);
```

### Simple use case #2: Updating multiple Eloquent Models

If you need to update the values in some Model classes and want to automatically mass update those changes,
then this is for you!

The existing `masUpdate` query is capable of identifying the _dirty_ attributes of `Eloquent` model classes
and compile them properly. You don't need to manually convert the models into an array, you just pass the
list of models you want to update, and it takes care of the rest.

> Tip: If you pass a full list of `Eloquent` models, only those with _dirty_ values will be updated,
> so you don't actually need to filter the unchanged ones manually.

Let's recreate the previous example, but using `Eloquent` models...

```php
// Say we already pulled our user models previously... Something like this:
$jorge = User::where('name', 'Jorge Gonzales')->first();
$gladys = User::where('name', 'Gladys Martines')->first();

// And let's say we already made changes to those models... Like this:
$jorge->name = 'Jorge González';
$gladys->name = 'Gladys Martínez';

// And now, let's update both models in a single query:
User::massUpdate(
    values: [$jorge, $gladys]
);
```

Pretty cool, right?

> Note: It is only possible to mass update instances of the same `Eloquent` model,
> it is not possible to mix the _Query Builder_ with different `Eloquent` model classes.

### Complicated use case: Using multiple indexes to differentiate records

Let's say that we just created `expenses` table to track how much we spend across time, and
we manually filled the following values:

| id | year | quarter | total_expenses |
| -- | ---- | ------- | -------------- |
| .. | ..   | ..      | ..             |
| .. | 2019 | Q3      | 216.70         |
| .. | 2019 | Q4      | 216.70         |
| .. | 2020 | Q1      | `416.70`       |
| .. | 2020 | Q2      | 211.12         |
| .. | 2020 | Q3      | 113.17         |
| .. | 2020 | Q4      | 422.89         |
| .. | 2021 | Q1      | `431.35`       |

> Above information is not real, I don't track my expenses quarterly.

Oops... We made a little mistake... Expenses from Q1 of 2020 and 2021 are switched, and in order to fix it
we could only pass the `quarter` column as an index, but if we only pass down the `quarter` column as an index,
we'll modify **ALL** `Q1` records. So, for this, we should also pass down the `year` column as an index:

```php
Expense::massUpdate(
    values: [
        ['year' => 2020, 'quarter' => 'Q1', 'total_expenses' => 431.35],
        ['year' => 2021, 'quarter' => 'Q1', 'total_expenses' => 416.70],
    ],
    uniqueBy: ['year', 'quarter']
);
```

> Tip: If you ever need to specify more than one or two indexes,
> just include all of them in the `values` and `uniqueBy` parameters.

The result in the table will be properly updated:

| id | year | quarter | total_expenses |
| -- | ---- | ------- | -------------- |
| .. | ..   | ..      | ..             |
| .. | 2020 | Q1      | `431.35`       |
| .. | ..   | ..      | ..             |
| .. | 2021 | Q1      | `416.70`       |

> **NOTE**: It is important that you always include the `uniqueBy` columns in your
> `values` array, exceptions will be thrown otherwise.

> **NOTE #2**: It is not possible to update the values of the `uniqueBy` columns.
> Every column specified in this parameter will be filtered from the ones that
> are going to be updated.
>
> This prevents unexpected side effects from happening while updating `values`
> in `array` shape and passed as `Eloquent` models.

### Advanced use case: Chaining with other query statements

TODO

## Testing

```bash
composer test
```

## Changelog

Please see [CHANGELOG](CHANGELOG.md) for more information on what has changed recently.

## Contributing

Please see [CONTRIBUTING](.github/CONTRIBUTING.md) for details.

## Security Vulnerabilities

If you discover any security related issues, please email yo@jorgeglz.io instead of using the issue tracker.

## Credits

- [Jorge González](https://github.com/iksaku)
- [All Contributors](../../contributors)

## License

The MIT License (MIT). Please see [License File](LICENSE.md) for more information.
